
--- Page 1 ---
IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026 5608519
Breaking the Scale Barrier: A Scale-Progressive
Water Body Extraction Framework Inspired by
Human Cognitive Mechanisms
Fanlin Meng , Guo Zhang , Member, IEEE, Hao Cui , Gui Gao , Senior Member, IEEE, Wenxuan Liu ,
Haifeng Li , Senior Member, IEEE, Wei Wang, and Zekun Hu
Abstract—Water bodies are typical natural features that 8.1%,6.65%,and6.79%.Theseresultsvalidatetheeffectiveness
exhibit significant variations in scale and appearance in high- of the proposed framework and offer a novel solution for
resolutionremotesensingimageryduetotheinfluenceoffactors high-precisiondynamicmonitoringofwaterbodiesusingremote
such as topography, temperature, sediment content, and aquatic sensing imagery. The source code and datasets will be made
vegetation. Existing deep learning-based water body segmenta- publicly available at https://github.com/XinMe/SPPrompt-Water
tion networks typically adopt a local sliding-window approach
Index Terms—Deep learning, high spatial resolution (HSR)
for training and inference. However, this strategy limits the
imagery, prompt learning, water body extraction.
receptive field and hampers the model’s ability to utilize con-
textual information for identifying large-scale, complex-textured
I. INTRODUCTION
water bodies, often resulting in misclassification. To address
these limitations, we propose a scale-progressive prompt water SURFACE water bodies, as a key component of the
body extraction framework (SPPrompt-Water), inspired by the Earth’s ecosystem, hold significant value in areas such as
hierarchical “global-to-local” cognitive mechanisms of human water resource management, environmental protection, urban
vision. The framework employs progressive prompting to facili-
planning, and disaster monitoring [1], [2]. Accurate and
tate cross-scale contextual knowledge transfer, thereby enabling
efficient extraction of water bodies is a critical foundation
high-precisionwaterbodyextraction.Tosupportthisframework,
wedesignanenforcedprompt-basedparallelsimulationtraining for informed scientific decision-making [3]. In recent years,
strategy, which leverages cross-scale sample simulation and remote sensing-based water body extraction techniques driven
label decomposition to obtain object-level supervision within the by deep learning have achieved remarkable progress, signif-
same scene. Through parallel contrastive training, the model
icantly improving the precision of water body detection in
learns to perform segmentation with enforced prompt guidance.
high-resolution imagery [4]. However, due to factors such as
Extensive experiments conducted on the GID, Complex Water
BodiesSegmentationDataset(CWBSD)andGLH-Waterdatasets limited training samples, model training and inference strate-
demonstratethattheproposedmethodeffectivelybalancesspatial gies, and computational resource constraints [5], current deep
continuity in large-scale water bodies with boundary precision learning methods still face challenges in terms of robustness
in small-scale ones. Our method achieves mean Intersection
andstabilitywhenadaptingtothemultiscalenatureofremote
over Union (mIoU) scores of 83.22%, 92.27%, and 86.91% on
sensing imagery and extracting spatially continuous water
the respective datasets, outperforming existing approaches by
bodies in large scenes.
Received10June2025;revised24November2025and15January2026; Asatypicaltypeofnaturalland-cover,waterbodiesexhibit
accepted 30 January 2026. Date of publication 6 February 2026; date of spatial scales and spectral characteristics that are jointly influ-
current version 20 February 2026. This work was supported in part by the
enced by multiple factors, including terrain variation, water
NationalNaturalScienceFoundationofChinaunderGrantU24A20589and
Grant 42301411 and in part by National Key Research and Development temperature, suspended sediment concentration, and aquatic
Program of China under Grant 2024YFF0617401. (Corresponding author: vegetation distribution [1], [6], [7]. By summarizing existing
HaoCui.)
studies, we identify the following key challenges in deep
Fanlin Meng is with the School of Earth Sciences and Resource, China
University of Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing 100083 China, and also with learning-based water body extraction.
theStateKeyLaboratoryofInformationEngineeringinSurveying,Mapping 1) Scale Variability Leads to Contextual Modeling
and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China (e-mail:
Challenges [8]. High-resolution remote sensing images often
mengfanlin@email.cugb.edu.cn).
Guo Zhang, Hao Cui, Wei Wang, and Zekun Hu are with the cover extremely large scenes (e.g., on the order of 10 000×
State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping 10000 pixels), and a single image may span tens to hundreds
and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China (e-mail:
of square kilometers. Correspondingly, large water bodies
guozhang@whu.edu.cn; cuihaocasm@whu.edu.cn; 18339190251@163.com;
zekunhu@whu.edu.cn). (lakes, coastal water, and oceans) and small ones (ponds,
Gui Gao is with the Faculty of Geosciences and Environmental Engi- narrowstreams)mayoccupytensofthousandstoonlyseveral
neering, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 611756, China (e-mail: pixels within an image [6], [9], resulting in substantial differ-
dellar@126.com).
WenxuanLiuiswithWuhanDaspatialTechnologyCompanyLtd.,Wuhan ences in shape, size, and geometric morphology (as shown in
430223,China(e-mail:liuwenxuan@daspatial.com). Fig.1).However,mainstreamdeeplearningmethodstypically
Haifeng Li is with the School of Geosciences and Info-Physics, Central
adopt local sliding-window strategies for both training and
SouthUniversity,Changsha410012,China(e-mail:lihaifeng@csu.edu.cn).
DigitalObjectIdentifier10.1109/TGRS.2026.3661185 inference. Prior studies have shown that such a processing
1558-0644©2026IEEE.Allrightsreserved,includingrightsfortextanddatamining,andtrainingofartificialintelligenceand
similartechnologies.Personaluseispermitted,butrepublication/redistributionrequiresIEEEpermission.
Seehttps://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.htmlformoreinformation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 2 ---
5608519 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
Fig.2. Cognitiveprocessofhumanremotesensingimageinterpretation.
“global-to-local” perception paradigm. This process begins
Fig.1. Comparisonofdifferenttypesofwaterbodiesunderthesameimage with perceiving the topological contours and spatial distri-
sizeandspatialresolution. bution of large-scale water bodies through multiscale image
pyramids. Subsequently, attention shifts to local regions to
paradigmconstrainsthemodel’seffectivereceptivefield,mak- analyze spectral and textural details. Finally, coherent water
ingitdifficultforthenetworktocapturelong-rangecontextual bodyrecognitionisachievedbyintegratingmultilevelfeatures.
Forinstance,evenwhenwaterbodiesareinafrozenstateand
dependencies within each window [10], [11], particularly in
are difficult to identify within small-scale sliding windows,
regionswithcomplextextures.Consequently,theselimitations
their boundary textures remain distinguishable from land at
can lead to local misclassification errors and cause noticeable
a global scale, as illustrated in Fig. 2. These global cues can
mosaic artifacts after stitching the window-wise predictions
effectivelyguidesubsequentreasoningatfinerlevels,enabling
back into a full-scene result [5], [12].
more precise segmentation at the local scale.
2) Appearance Variability Leads to Local Feature Extrac-
Inspired by this cognitive process, we aim to propose a
tion Challenges [7], [13]. At a global scale, water bodies
scale-progressive prompt water body extraction framework
typically exhibit distinctive geometric shapes that facilitate
(SPPrompt-Water) that simulates the human paradigm of
their identification. However, at the local scale, their textural
prior-guided global reasoning followed by local refinement.
characteristics can vary substantially due to factors such as
The core innovation of the framework lies in its construc-
geographic location, seasonal dynamics, sediment concentra-
tion of a hierarchically progressive enforced prompt learning
tion, and the distribution of aquatic vegetation. For example,
mechanism, which enables effective cross-scale contextual
Chen et al. [7] reported that the texture patterns of frozen
lakes differ markedly from those of liquid water; similarly, knowledge transfer. Our goal is to overcome the local percep-
tion limitations of conventional sliding-window approaches,
turbid rivers with high sediment loads present significantly
different spectral–textural appearances compared with clear maintaining spatial continuity for large-scale water bod-
ies while accurately identifying fragmented boundaries and
water bodies [13].
internal heterogeneity of small-scale water bodies. Accord-
However, these two challenges often co-occur in practical
applications,jointlyincreasingthedifficultyofaccuratewater- ingly, the main objectives of this study are outlined as
follows.
body extraction [14]. Fundamentally, both the contextual gaps
causedbyscalevariationsandthelocalspectralheterogeneity 1) To develop the SPPrompt-Water, which constructs a
arising from phenotypic differences are closely related to the hierarchically progressive contextual co-optimization
model’slimitedabilitytoleveragecontextualinformation[15]. mechanism that integrates global semantics with local
If cross-scale and cross-region contextual constraints can be texture details. It is designed to enhance the model’s
incorporated during inference, the model would be able to ability to capture intraclass heterogeneity within water
interpret the overall morphology of water bodies within a bodies and suppress misclassification in spectrally
broader structural framework, thereby naturally compensating ambiguous regions.
for inconsistencies in local texture and spectral appearance. 2) To propose an enforced prompt-based supervised
For example, with access to global spatial context, the model learning strategy by decomposing object-level labels
can correctly identify heterogeneous regions within a large into coarse-grained prompt-aware semantic priors and
water body—such as those affected by ice or algae—as parts enforcing parallel contrastive training to enhance
of the same class, rather than incorrectly segmenting them prompt-guided segmentation.
into separate components. Therefore, we argue that enhancing 3) Toconstructalarge-scalesemanticsegmentationdataset
contextual modeling capability is an effective approach to for remote sensing water bodies—the complex water
simultaneously mitigating both challenges and improving the bodies segmentation dataset (CWBSD)—which encom-
stability and reliability of water-body extraction in complex passes a diverse range of challenging scenarios, includ-
scenarios. ing ice–water mixed lakes, high-sediment rivers, and
We conducted an in-depth analysis of the human cog- water surfaces partially obscured by thin clouds.
nitive process in remote sensing image interpretation and The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section II
found that humans typically follow a hierarchical, progressive introduces the related work in the water extraction field.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 3 ---
MENGetal.:BREAKINGTHESCALEBARRIER:ASCALE-PROGRESSIVEWATERBODYEXTRACTION 5608519
Section III details the SPPrompt-Water. Section IV describes 1) CNN-basedmethodsforsemanticsegmentationperform
the datasets and the experiments. Finally, Section V pixelwise classification of water bodies by leveraging
summarizes the conclusion. localfeatureextraction[26],[27].Withtheadvancement
of deep learning, classic architectures such as ResNet
II. RELATEDWORK [28], U-Net [29], and DeepLab [30] have been widely
appliedinremotesensingimagesegmentation,providing
A. Traditional Remote Sensing Water Body Extraction
a solid technical foundation for water body extrac-
Methods
tion. For example, DensePPMUNet-a [31] introduces a
Traditional remote sensing methods for water body extrac-
dense pyramid pooling module to enhance multiscale
tion primarily rely on the strong absorption characteristics
contextual feature fusion, thereby improving extraction
of water in the near-infrared (NIR) and shortwave-infrared
accuracy.Anotherrepresentativework,theCOMframe-
(SWIR) bands, which result in low reflectance. By exploit-
work[32],usesanobject-contextualperceptionnetwork
ing the spectral differences between water and other land
to perform cross-dataset water body extraction, signifi-
covers such as vegetation and soil, these methods achieve
cantly boosting model generalization and applicability
classification. Specifically, the features can be divided into across different remote sensing scenes. Additionally,
two categories: single-band features and multiband spec-
MSResNet [33] incorporates specially designed mod-
tral relationships. The former directly uses low reflectance
ules to distinguish water bodies of varying scales and
values in bands such as NIR (e.g., Landsat B5) to iden-
shapes and introduces residual connections to address
tify water bodies [16], while the latter constructs water the difficulty in delineating fragmented water bound-
indicessuchasthenormalizeddifferencewaterindex(NDWI)
aries, thereby enhancing edge recognition performance.
and its modified forms (MNDWI) to enhance the con-
However, traditional CNNs are limited by their local
trast between high reflectance in visible bands and strong
receptive fields and struggle to capture the global con-
absorptioninNIR/SWIR,therebyimprovingseparability[17],
textual dependencies that are widely present in remote
[18], [19].
sensing images. This often leads to susceptibility to
In terms of implementation, traditional methods mainly
spectral noise and intraclass heterogeneity in complex
includethreshold-basedapproaches,whichrelyonpriorrules,
environments [34], [35].
and data-driven classifiers. Threshold methods are compu-
2) Transformer-based architectures have revolutionized
tationally simple, but the selection of thresholds depends
feature-modeling paradigms [36], [37]. Their self-
on human expertise and is prone to errors due to shad-
attention mechanisms enable long-range dependencies
ows or clouds. Early classifier methods employed statistical
between pixels, overcoming the spatial limitations of
models such as maximum likelihood classification, and later
conventional CNNs [37]. For instance, Ding et al. [38]
evolved to machine learning approaches including support
proposed a hybrid architecture that employs a trans-
vectormachines(SVMs)[20],decisiontrees[21],andrandom
former encoder to capture global contextual features
forests [22].
while using a CNN decoder to preserve local details,
Traditional methods heavily depend on spectral informa-
therebyenhancingthecompletenessofcontinuouswater
tion and perform well on medium-resolution imagery with
body extraction in wide-area imagery. Zhong et al. [39]
relatively complete spectral bands, including SWIR (e.g.,
developed NT-Net, which integrates multilevel trans-
Landsat, Sentinel-2). However, high-resolution imagery gen-
formermodulestosuppressbackgroundinterferenceand
erally has limited spectral resolution and fewer bands, often
employsboundaryenhancementstrategiestoaddressthe
lacking SWIR, which leads to spectral confusion between
disconnectionofsmallwaterbodies.Recentresearchhas
water and dark surfaces such as shadows, thereby limiting the
increasingly focused on heterogeneous feature fusion.
applicability of traditional methods [23], [24].
For example, Zhang et al. [40] proposed a collabora-
tive Swin transformer–CNN framework that establishes
B. Deep Learning-Based Remote Sensing Water Body globalsemanticrelationshipswhilepreservinglocaltex-
Extraction Methods turedetails,enablingsubpixel-levellocalizationofwater
Driven by advancements in deep learning, the field of boundaries in complex terrains.
semantic segmentation for remote sensing imagery has In summary, although deep learning-based semantic seg-
achieved remarkable progress. In particular, for water body mentation methods provide powerful technical support for
extraction tasks, deep learning methods have demonstrated high-resolution remote sensing water body extraction, their
significant improvements in identifying water bodies under inherent limitations still constrain performance in complex
complex scenarios, owing to their powerful capabilities in scenarios [6], [38]. First, regarding scale characteristics,
feature extraction and representation [25]. mainstream methods generally adopt a “slice-then-process”
Inrecentyears,convolutionalneuralnetworks(CNNs)have paradigm [12], [41], which, due to its limited receptive field,
achieved remarkable progress in remote sensing semantic struggles to capture long-range contextual dependencies. This
segmentation tasks due to their powerful ability to extract often leads to fragmented segmentation of large water bodies
localfeatures,whiletransformerarchitectures,knownfortheir andconfusioninsmallwaterbodieswithhighlyvariablemor-
superior global modeling capabilities, have gradually become phologies[5].Second,intermsoffeatureperception,whether
essential tools for interpreting complex scenes. usingCNNsortransformermodels,theabilitytodiscriminate
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 4 ---
5608519 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
local spectral and texture variations remains insufficient when also beginning to show promise in remote sensing applica-
facedwithappearancevariabilitycausedbyice,snow,oralgae tions. For example, Osco et al. [51] proposed applying the
[7], [13]. This makes the models susceptible to interference Grounded-SAM framework [52] to remote sensing imagery.
from heterogeneous water regions and background objects, By using natural language prompts to guide GroundDINO
resulting in misclassification. Therefore, exploring a new [53] in object localization, followed by precise segmenta-
paradigm that can collaboratively model both global context tion via SAM, the framework enables zero-shot semantic
andlocaldetailsiscrucialtoovercomingthecurrenttechnical segmentation of remote sensing images based on textual
bottlenecks [42]. descriptions.
In summary, prompt learning has demonstrated superior
C. Prompt Learning feature extraction capabilities in computer vision tasks. In
Thefundamentalprincipleofpromptlearningliesinencod- recent years, this approach has been gradually introduced
ing task objectives as “prompts” that are input into the into the field of intelligent remote sensing interpretation, with
model. By leveraging these prompts, the model can activate several studies proposing adaptive prompt learning frame-
its prelearned knowledge, enabling it to perform new tasks works for tasks such as land-cover classification and instance
with no or minimal parameter updates. These prompts can segmentation. Building upon the strengths of prompt learn-
take the form of natural language sentences, trainable vectors, ing, we conduct research on remote sensing-based waterbody
or spatial cues within images. Depending on the content interpretation, aiming to enhance the accuracy of waterbody
of the prompt, the model adjusts its attention mechanisms extraction and improve boundary delineation performance.
and feature processing strategies, guiding it to focus on
regions or semantic information relevant to the prompt. This III. METHODOLOGY
mechanism not only effectively bridges the semantic gap
We simulate the hierarchical and progressive cognitive
between downstream tasks and pretrained models but also
mechanism of human vision—from global perception to
significantly enhances the model’s generalization and transfer
local refinement—and propose a scale-progressive, prompt-
capabilities. The theoretical foundation of this paradigm can
guided framework for waterbody extraction. As illustrated
be traced back to transformative research in the field of
in Fig. 3, this framework consists of two main compo-
natural language processing (NLP). Inspired by large-scale
nents: network architecture design and a training–inference
pretrained models such as GPT-3 [43], researchers proposed
strategy. Architecturally, we develop a novel network named
the use of textual prompts to steer model behavior. This
SPPrompt-Water,whichincorporatesapromptguidancemod-
paradigm was subsequently extended to the field of com- ule to transfer spatial-semantic information across different
puter vision, where learnable prompt vectors allow models
hierarchicallevels.Thisfacilitateslayerwiserefinementofseg-
to dynamically reconstruct feature representations based on
mentationresults andenablesaccuratedelineation ofcomplex
task context. As a result, models have demonstrated strong
waterbody structures. In terms of strategy, we introduce an
performance in visual tasks such as image classification and
enforced prompt-based parallel simulation training approach
semantic segmentation [44], [45]. A representative example is
that enhances the model’s prompt guidance capability by
the segment anything model (SAM) [46], which establishes
integrating label decomposition and perturbation simulation
a new benchmark in semantic segmentation by incorporat-
mechanisms. During inference, we adopt a scale-progressive
ing a flexible prompting mechanism and robust zero-shot
reasoning mechanism, which follows a closed-loop opti-
capabilities.
mization process of “downsampling–prompting–upsampling,”
In the field of intelligent remote sensing interpretation,
achieving fine-grained segmentation of waterbody regions
prompt learning has emerged as a novel paradigm and is
in a progressive manner from global context to local
gradually being applied to key tasks such as semantic seg-
detail.
mentation of geospatial objects and object detection. Current
research primarily focuses on the use of visual prompts. For
A. SPPrompt-Water Net
instance, Immanuel and Sinulingga [47], building upon the
SegGPT framework [48], proposed an innovative hierarchical The SPPrompt-Water Net is responsible for encoding both
prompt learning architecture. By independently optimizing the image and the prompts at each layer, facilitating guided
prompt vectors for newly introduced object classes, their fusion. By integrating semantic guidance and detail enhance-
approach effectively mitigates the issue of catastrophic for- ment, the network improves segmentation performance in
getting in continual learning scenarios. Similarly, Chen et al. complex scenes. The overall architecture comprises a prompt
[49]developedRSPrompter,agroundbreakingframeworkthat guidancemoduleandadetailrefinementmodule,asillustrated
introduces prompt learning into instance segmentation tasks. in Fig. 4. The specific design is as follows.
Leveraging a self-supervised learning paradigm, RSPrompter 1) Prompt Guidance Module: The primary function of
adaptively generates visual prompt embeddings enriched with the prompt guidance module is to fuse the low-resolution
geometric priors. In response to the characteristics of aerial segmentation results from the previous layer with the higher-
imagery, GeoSAM [50] fine-tunes the SAM by integrating resolution image features at the current layer. The core idea
sparse point prompts with dense visual prompts, significantly is to treat the low-resolution prompt map from the previous
improving semantic segmentation accuracy for transporta- layer as an analogy to the global perception process in human
tion infrastructure. On the other hand, textual prompts are vision, which provides a coarse estimation of the target’s
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 5 ---
MENGetal.:BREAKINGTHESCALEBARRIER:ASCALE-PROGRESSIVEWATERBODYEXTRACTION 5608519
Fig.3. Overallarchitectureoftheproposedframework.
Fig.4. SPPrompt-WaterNet.
spatial extent. In contrast, the high-resolution image at the The detailed workflow is as follows. Given a prompt image
current layer offers rich detail information to further refine I ∈ RH/2×W/2, we first obtain the prompt embedding fea-
p
boundary representations based on the coarse outline. This tures E through convolution. A learnable output vector q
p
process is conceptually similar to a pyramid-based multiscale is then introduced into the prompt embedding to construct
processing strategy, where global structures are first captured the enhanced prompt representation Q = [E ;q]. Based
P p
atlowerresolutions,andsubsequently,higher-resolutionlayers on this, prompt guidance module first performs self-attention
are guided to extract local fine-grained features, ultimately withintheprompttocapturetheglobalstructuralrelationships
leading to more accurate segmentation results. among the prompt tokens. Next, a bidirectional cross-modal
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 6 ---
5608519 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
attention mechanism is established: the token-to-image atten- [56].Thischoiceismotivatedbythecomplementarystrengths
tion transfers positional and structural prior information from of the two losses in handling class imbalance. Dice loss
theprompttokenstotheimagefeatures,guidingthebackbone tacklesmacroscopicclassimbalancebydirectlyoptimizingthe
network to focus on potential target regions; conversely, the overlap of the predicted segmentation regions and is defined
image-to-token attention uses image semantics to adaptively as follows:
modulatethepromptfeatures,allowingthepromptinformation P
2 y y +(cid:15)
to adjust to the current scene distribution. After these two L =1− true pred (4)
Dice P y + P y +(cid:15)
informationflowspassthroughthreelayersofMLPforfurther true pred
abstraction, a context-aware fused representation is obtained
where y and y denote the ground-truth labels and pre-
true pred
P =MLP3(AttnFuse(Q ,F )) (1) dicted probabilities, respectively, and (cid:15) is a small smoothing
fuse P trans
term to prevent division by zero. By measuring the overlap of
whereAttnFuse(·)representstheintegratedcomputationofthe
the entire segmentation region, this loss is insensitive to the
aforementioned self-attention and bidirectional cross-modal numberofforegroundpixels,therebyeffectivelyimprovingthe
attention.Finally,aftertheimagefeatureK isupsampledvia
img segmentation performance of small targets.
transposedconvolution,itismultipliedelementwisewith P fuse However, dice loss may lack sufficient focus when dealing
to obtain the water foreground probability map as follows:
with a large number of simple background pixels. Therefore,
F =Conv (cid:0) K (cid:1) (cid:12)P . (2) we introduce focal loss to concentrate on hard-to-classify
prompt img fuse
pixels at a more fine-grained level. It dynamically down-
This module leverages the bidirectional guidance between
weights easily classified samples through a modulating factor
prompt priors and image features to effectively enhance the
and is defined as follows:
model’s discriminative capability in complex backgrounds.
WeadoptthepretrainedSAM[46]modelastheencoderof L =−α (cid:0) 1−y (cid:1)γ log (cid:0) y (cid:1) (5)
Focal pred pred
thetransformerencodertofullyleverageitspowerfulsegmen-
tation capabilities. To preserve its original feature extraction whereαisthebalancingfactorandγisthefocusingparameter.
performance, we freeze the parameters of the transformer Inthiswork,wesetγ=2andα=1.Thisdesignensuresthat
encoder during training, keeping its weights unchanged with- the model continuously pays attention to more challenging
out fine-tuning. samples during training, thereby further improving segmen-
2) Detail Refinement and Feature Fusion: Although the tation accuracy in complex backgrounds. By combining the
transformerencodereffectivelycapturesglobalsemanticinfor- strengths of both losses, we define the final loss function as
mation, it primarily serves the prompt guidance module and their weighted sum
is thus susceptible to the influence of large-scale responses in
thepromptedregions.Thiscanleadtotheunderrepresentation L Total =λ Dice L Dice +λ Focal L Focal . (6)
of fine-grained, small-scale water bodies. To address this
limitation,weintroducetheSwintransformer[54]asaparallel Dice loss ensures the overall geometric integrity of the
branch to enhance the extraction of local detail features. segmented targets, while focal loss refines pixel-level clas-
The Swin transformer employs window-based multihead sification boundaries. We expect that the synergistic effect of
self-attention (W-MSA) to model local features. Unlike thetwolosseswilljointlyenhancethemodel’srobustnessand
ViT [37], which performs self-attention globally, W-MSA overall performance in scenarios with class imbalance.
restricts attention computation to nonoverlapping local win-
dows, thereby reducing computational complexity. However,
B. Prompt-Guided Training and Inference Method
this limitation also constrains information exchange across
differentwindows.Toaddressthisissue,theSwinTransformer To address the limitations of conventional image-label
introduces the SW-MSA mechanism in adjacent layers. By supervision paradigms, in which models passively fit the
shiftingwindowpositionsbetweenlayers,SW-MSAfacilitates data distribution and lack dynamic semantic guidance, we
cross-window feature fusion, thereby enhancing the model’s propose a prompt-guided training and inference method. Dur-
capability in fine-grained representation learning. ing training, we construct an enforced prompt-based parallel
Atthefinalstageofthenetwork,inordertofurtherintegrate simulation framework that explicitly enhances the association
local detail features with prompt-guided information, we con- between prompt vectors and target regions by decomposing
catenatethefeaturerepresentationF ,extractedbytheSwin label regions and prompt samples for parallel training. In the
swin
transformer,withtheprompt-guidedfeaturesF ,outputby inference phase, we introduce a scale-progressive prompting
prompt
the prompt guidance module, along the channel dimension to mechanism that follows a closed-loop optimization process
obtain the final fused representation Y, as formulated in the consistingofdownsampling,prompting,andupsampling.This
following equation: mechanismintegratesmultiscalefeatureinformation,allowing
Y =Concat (cid:0) F ,F (cid:1) . (3) coarse-grained prompts to progressively guide fine-grained
swin prompt segmentation. It enables hierarchical and refined delineation
To address the significant class imbalance in this task (i.e., of water bodies, from global coherence to local detail, effec-
backgroundpixelsvastlyoutnumbertargetpixels),weemploy tively alleviating the spatial fragmentation problem caused by
a hybrid loss function combining dice loss [55] and focal loss patch-based processing in traditional approaches.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 7 ---
MENGetal.:BREAKINGTHESCALEBARRIER:ASCALE-PROGRESSIVEWATERBODYEXTRACTION 5608519
1) Enforced Prompt-Based Parallel Simulation Training:
The conventional image-label supervision paradigm relies on
supervised training for the model to learn the mapping from
images to annotations, which essentially results in passive
fitting of the data distribution. In this study, we propose the
enforcedprompt-basedparallelsimulation-trainingframework.
Itscoreideaistoprovideonlypartialsupervisoryinformation
for the sample images and, through prompt learning and
contrastive training, enable the model to acquire the ability
to perform segmentation guided by prompts, achieving a
“segment where pointed” effect. The overall framework is
summarized in Algorithm 1.
As shown in Fig. 5, during the training stage, we auto-
matically construct prompt samples from the annotated data Fig.5. Illustrationofenforcedprompt-basedparallelsimulationtraining.
through a three-step process.
Algorithm 1 Enforced Prompt-Based Parallel Simulation
1) Label Topological Decomposition: We first perform
Training
connected-component analysis on water body labels,
Input: Training image set I, label set L, number of iterations T
decomposing complex whole-water polygons into Output: Trained model parameters Θ
multiple spatially independent subregions to obtain 1: for t=1 to T do
object-level supervision. 2: Sample a mini-batch (I batch, L batch) from the dataset
2) Morphological Perturbation (Erosion/Dilation): To sim- 3: for each image-label pair (I,L) in (I batch ,L batch ) do
4: # 1. Label decomposition and prompt generation
ulate potential uncertainties in real prompts, each
5: R= RandomMerge(TopologicalDecomposition(L))
subregion is randomly eroded or dilated (with the struc-
# Eq.(7)
tural element size randomly chosen between 3 and 10), 6: Prompt Set =∅
generating noisy prompt maps that enable the model to 7: Label set Set = ø
handle imprecise prompts. 8: for each decomposed region R j in R do
3) Downsampling: To create coarse-grained prompts com- 9: P j = DownSample(Dilation(Erosion (R j )))
# Eq.(8), prompt map
patible with the hierarchical network, the perturbed 10: L j =R j # Guidedlabel
prompt maps are downsampled to obtain low-resolution 11: Add (P j ,L j ) into Prompt set and Label set
prompts, which serve as guidance for lower-level 12: end for
network inputs. Through these three steps, we gener- 13: # 2. Parallel simulation training
ate a set of enhanced prompt samples corresponding 14: for each prompt-1abel pair (P,L guide ) in (Prompt Set , Label
) do
Set
to the original images, along with their region-level 15: Y pred = SPPrompt-Water-Net (I,P) # Forward pass
supervisory labels. 16: Loss = ComputeLoss (Y pred ,L guide ) # Simplifiedloss
Let the original label image be L∈{0,1}H×W. By applying 17: Backpropagate and accumulate gradients
18: end for
the topological decomposition function T(·), an initial set of 19: Update model parameters Θ using accumulated gradients
independent subregions T(L) can be obtained. Based on this, 20: end for
theRandomMergefunctionrandomlysamplesfromthesesub- 21: end for
regions and merges the sampled subregions using a pixelwise 22: return Θ
union, thereby generating a set of prompts R with varying
coverage
bodyregionswithintheimage,therebyformingcorresponding
R=RandomMerge(T(L))={R 1 ,R 2 ,...,R N }. (7) region-guided labels (e.g., L 2 , L 3 , and L 4 in Fig. 5). Based on
the correspondence between each prompt and its label, the
Subsequently,asshownin(8),eachimageR j intheprompt network performs local supervised learning under different
set R undergoes erosion E(), dilation D(), and downsampling
prompt conditions, progressively guiding the establishment
downsample() operations
of an explicit association from prompts to target responses.
P j =DownSample (cid:0) D (cid:0) E (cid:0) R j (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) ∈RH 2 ×W 2 (8) This mechanism enforces the model to learn texture features
within the prompt range for region-focused constraints and
where the kernel size for erosion and dilation is randomly to apply feature activation penalties to nonprompt regions for
selected between 3 and 10, the number of iterations set to 1. background suppression.
During the training phase, images and prompt patches are 2) Scale-Progressive Prompt-Guided Inference: In this
jointly input into the SPPrompt-Water Net to achieve guided section,wedesignascale-progressivepromptinferencemech-
feature interaction and water body region extraction. The anism that achieves gradual refinement from global structures
prompt patches serve as spatial prior knowledge to construct to local boundaries. This method constructs a multiscale
spatially constrained supervision, enhancing the model’s per- feature pyramid based on cascaded downsampling, using
ceptionofdesignatedregions.Specifically,forthesameremote coarse-grained prompts as high-level priors to progressively
sensingimage,multipledifferentpromptmapsareconstructed guide the optimization of low-level local features. Through a
(e.g., P , P , and P in Fig. 5), each covering different water closed-loopprocessofdownsampling,prompting,andupsam-
2 3 4
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 8 ---
5608519 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
segmentation result was reconstructed by spatially stitching
together 43 subimages, achieving a high-precision prediction
output consistent with the original image size.
To accommodate scenarios where explicit prompts are
unavailable during inference, we introduce a “default prompt
token” at the highest scale layer (Layer N), which is imple-
mented as a zero-valued tensor and is shared across all
images and scenes. When no prompt image is provided, this
token serves as a placeholder input to the prompt module,
enablingthenetworktooperatenormallyundera“no-prompt”
condition. Although it does not carry any prior information
aboutthescene,itpreservesthestructuralconsistencyrequired
by the prompt mechanism. Subsequently, the model uses the
predictionfromLayerNasthepromptforLayerN−1,andthis
processisrepeatedacrosssubsequentlayers.Throughthistop-
down,progressivepromptmechanism,themodelcangenerate
increasingly refined pseudo-prompts at each layer, ultimately
producing reliable water body segmentation results.
Fig.6. Illustrationofthescale-progressivepromptinferencemechanism.
Algorithm 2 Scale-Progressive Prompt-Guided Inference
Input: Full-scene image I , model SPPrompt-Water-Net, pyramid
pling, multiscale semantic collaborative inference is realized, 0
levels N
effectively enhancing the continuity expression and boundary Output: Final segmentation Y
0
delineation of complex water body structures. 1: #Build image pyramid
Giventhefull-sceneremotesensingimageI ,amultiresolu- 2: for n=N down to 0 do
tionfeaturepyramidisconstructedbycascaded 0 downsampling 3: I n = Downsample(I 0 , factor =2n)
4: end for
at a rate of 2n per level. As illustrated in Fig. 6, the highest
5: # Top-level coarse segmentation
downsampling level is defined as Layer N, with its resolution 6: P N = InitializePrompt(Size(I N ))
corresponding to I n = I 0 × 1/2n. At this level, the image 7: Y N = SPPrompt-Water-Net (I N ,P N )
I ∈ RH×W is obtained, along with the corresponding coarse- 8: #Progressive top-down refinement
g n rained prompt P ∈ RH/2×W/2. At Layer N, the initial 9: for n=N−1 down to 0 do
segmentation result n Y n ∈ RH×W is first generated through the 1 1 0 1 : : P I n N s = ub S = p S li p t( l Y it { ( n I + n 1 ) } ) # # 4 4 su s b u - b i - m p a ro g m es pts
SPPrompt-Water Net 12:
13: for i=1 to 4 do
Y n =SPPrompt(I n ,P n ). (9) 14: Y nˆi = SPPrompt-Water-Net (I n subˆi ,P nˆi )
15: end for
The initial result Y is divided along the spatial dimen-
n 16:
sion into four subregions {Pi n−1 }4 i=1 ∈ RH/2×W/2, which serve 17: Y n = Mosaic ({Y n n 1 }) # merge sub-results
as prompt embeddings Pi ∈ RH/2×W/2 for layer N − 1. 18: end for
n−1
Simultaneously, the image I n ∈ RH×W is partitioned in the 19: return Y 0
same spatial manner and then upsampled by a factor of two
to obtain the aligned layer N − 1 images Ii ∈ RH×W. At each scale level, the low-resolution prediction from
n−1
Subsequently,morerefinedsegmentationresultsYi ∈RH×W the previous layer is directly used as the prompt input for
n−1
are generated through SPPrompt-Water Net. This top-down the next layer, forming a “coarse-to-fine” hierarchical prompt
process is repeated at each layer with the same operations chain. The coarse-scale prompts provide the overall structure
until the original resolution is restored at layer N = 0. and large-scale water distribution, while the fine-scale mod-
As shown in (10), at layer 0, the images are restored to the ules iteratively refine local boundaries under the guidance of
original resolution, and all subregions {Yi}4N are concatenated the prompts, achieving progressive refinement from global
0 1
accordingtotheirspatialpositionstoreconstructthecomplete to local. This closed-loop, progressive inference mechanism
high-resolution segmentation result Y significantly enhances both the spatial continuity of large-
0
Y =mosaic (cid:16) ∪4NPPrompt (cid:0) Ii,Pi(cid:1)(cid:17) . (10) scale water bodies and the detailed delineation of small-scale
0 1 0 0 boundaries.
The above process is summarized in Algorithm 2.
Taking the GID dataset as an example, its original IV. EXPERIMENTS
image resolution is 7300 × 6908 pixels. To meet the scale
A. Datasets
consistency requirements of the hierarchical segmentation
network, the image is first padded with zeros to expand TovalidatethegeneralizationabilityoftheSPPrompt-Water
it to 8192 × 8192 pixels. Based on the ratio between the network, we conducted experiments on two datasets: the GID
image size and the minimum sub-image scale, the number of dataset and the CWBSD dataset.
hierarchy levels was set to 3. Finally, at level 0, the complete
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 9 ---
MENGetal.:BREAKINGTHESCALEBARRIER:ASCALE-PROGRESSIVEWATERBODYEXTRACTION 5608519
Fig.7. IllustrationofdifferenttypesofwaterbodiesintheCWBSDdataset.
1) GID: The GID dataset is constructed using imagery global surface water detection. It contains a total of 250
from the Gaofen-2 (GF-2) satellite and contains a total of satellite images, each with a resolution of 12800 × 12800
150 scenes with an original resolution of 7300×6908 pixels. pixels and a spatial resolution of 0.3 m. The images are
It is primarily designed for land cover classification tasks. sourced from the Google Earth platform, covering multiple
The original dataset includes annotations for five land cover regions worldwide (excluding Antarctica) and spanning the
classes: built-up, farmland, forest, meadow, and water. To period from 2011 to 2022 [57].
meet the requirements of our method, we retained only the
water class and divided the images into smaller patches of
B. Evaluation Indexes
1024 × 1024 pixels to ensure that the model could more
effectively learn water-related features. The test set defined To quantitatively evaluate the performance of different
methods, we compared the predicted masks with the ground
by the original authors of the GID dataset was used for
truth and adopted three commonly used metrics: overall
evaluation, while the remaining images were allocated for
accuracy (OA), mean intersection over union (mIoU), and
trainingandvalidation,ensuringthecomparabilityandvalidity
F1-score. The formulas for these metrics are defined as
of experimental results.
follows:
2) CWBSD: To further validate the effectiveness of
TP+TN
SPPrompt-Water Net, we constructed a dataset encompassing OA=
TP+TN+FP+FN
a wide range of complex water body scenarios. This dataset
N
includesvariouschallengingwatertypes,suchasfrozenlakes, mIoU= 1 X TP i
ice-water mixed lakes, algae-rich waters, lakes partially cov- N TP +FP +FN
ered by thin clouds, rivers with high sediment concentrations,
i=1 i i i
2TP
andwatersurfacesaffectedbysolarreflections,asillustratedin F1= (11)
2TP+FP+FN
Fig. 7. Additionally, the dataset contains small-scale artificial
water bodies such as man-made channels and ponds, ensuring where TP, TN, FP, and FN represent the number of true water
a diverse representation of water types. The dataset comprises pixels, true background pixels, false water pixels, and false
a total of 360 remote sensing images with variable sizes, background pixels, respectively. N denotes the total number
rangingfrom1665×1121–18722×11612pixels,andspatial of classes, and i indicates the ith class. In this study, N is
resolutions between 0.8 and 2 m. Each image contains three set to 2.
spectral bands (RGB) and is sourced from the Gaofen-1
(GF-1) and GF-2 satellites. During training, we uniformly C. Comparative Experiments
cropped the images into 1024×1024 patches. To ensure class
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed SPPrompt-
balance, we removed patches that did not contain any water
water method in waterbody extraction tasks, we conducted
bodies. The dataset was then split into 60% for training,
comparisons with seven representative deep learning-based
20% for validation, and 20% for testing. The test set is
waterbody extraction methods: U-Net [29], Swin trans-
madepubliclyavailabletofacilitatereproducibilityandfurther
former [54], QTNUnet [10], MECNet [11], MSLANet [25],
research.
MSResNet [33], and SkySense++ [58]. These methods were
3) GLH-Water: The GLH-water dataset is a large-scale, tested on the GID, CWBSD, and GLH-Water datasets.
ultrahigh-resolution satellite imagery dataset designed for
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 10 ---
5608519 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
Fig. 8. Visual results of different methods on GID. (a) Image. (b) Label. (c) U-Net. (d) Swin Transformer. (e) QTNUnet. (f) MECNet. (g) MSLANet.
(h)MSResNET.(i)SkySense++.(j)SPPrompt-Water(ours).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 11 ---
MENGetal.:BREAKINGTHESCALEBARRIER:ASCALE-PROGRESSIVEWATERBODYEXTRACTION 5608519
During inference, we introduce the proposed scale- TABLEI
progressive prompt-guided inference mechanism. In contrast, QUANTITATIVECOMPARISONRESULTSOFGID
baseline methods, which do not incorporate a prompt-guided
structure, still rely on a sliding-window inference strategy,
where the full image is divided into patches for prediction
and then reconstructed into a complete result. To ensure
fairness,allquantitativemetricsforthecomparedmethodsare
calculatedandevaluatedbasedonthereconstructedfull-scene
predictions.
1) GID: As shown in Table II, on the GID dataset,
the proposed SPPrompt-Water method achieved state-of-the-
art segmentation performance, outperforming all comparative
methods across multiple evaluation metrics. Specifically, it TABLEII
reached an OA of 99.09%, with an mIoU of 83.22%, and an QUANTITATIVECOMPARISONRESULTSOFCWBSD
F1-score of 85.92%. Although most methods reported high
OA values (all exceeding 96%), this is largely due to the
dominance of background and target categories in the test set,
which limits the sensitivity of OA in reflecting true model
discrimination—especially in the presence of minimal bound-
ary complexity. In contrast, mIoU and F1-score provide more
reliable evaluations of a model’s ability to accurately identify
waterbodies. For example, in terms of mIoU, SPPrompt-
water outperforms the second-ranked SkySense++ by 8.1%
points (83.22% versus 75.12%), and in F1-score, it exceeds
Swin transformer by 7.07% points (85.92% versus 78.85%),
2) CWBSD: AsshowninTableII,theproposedSPPrompt-
demonstrating its superior accuracy in target localization and
Water method achieves the best performance on the CWBSD
boundary delineation. These results indicate that SPPrompt-
dataset, with an OA of 99.51%, mIoU of 92.27%, and
Waternotonlydistinguisheswaterbodiesfromthebackground
F1-score of 93.97%, significantly outperforming all other
accurately but also possesses stronger representational and
comparison methods. Compared with the second-best per-
discriminativecapabilitieswhenhandlingcomplexboundaries
forming model, MSResNet, SPPrompt-Water improves OA
and fine structures.
by 2.42%, mIoU by 6.65%, and F1-score by 4.98%. These
As shown in the comparison results in Fig. 8, SPPrompt-
improvements indicate that the model possesses a stronger
Waterdemonstratessuperiorperformanceinpreservingwater-
body boundary integrity and capturing fine details, effectively discriminative capability along class boundaries, effectively
reducing both false positives and false negatives in waterbody
reducing shape distortion and misclassification. In complex
edge regions. Furthermore, it enhances recognition accu-
scenarios where waterbodies are interwoven with farmland,
racy in small-scale or morphologically irregular waterbodies,
models such as QTNUnet, MECNet, and MSLANet exhibit
thereby improving the model’s overall spatial consistency
notable confusion between farmland and pond categories.
and semantic completeness. These results demonstrate that
In contrast, SPPrompt-Water achieves higher accuracy in
by introducing a prompt guidance module, SPPrompt-Water
both regional segmentation and class discrimination. In the
effectively integrates multiscale spatial contextual informa-
blue-highlighted area of Fig. 8, SPPrompt-Water successfully
tion, significantly enhancing the model’s ability to identify
extracts water branches that are not labeled in the ground
waterbodies of various scales and irregular shapes.
truth, whereas Swin transformer fails to detect this region.
Through comparative experiments on representative scenes
AlthoughU-Net,QTNUnet,andMSResNETdoidentifyparts
ofthewaterbody,theirsegmentationresultssufferfromblurred shown in Fig. 9, we conducted a visual evaluation of the
semantic segmentation performance of each model. When the
boundaries and noticeable shape distortions. Similarly, in
water surface is densely covered with algae accompanied by
the green-highlighted area, a small pond in the lower-left
significantcolorvariation,thebaselinemodelstendtomisclas-
corner is not annotated in the ground truth, yet all methods
sify these areas due to an over-response to the algae texture,
detectit.Amongthem,SPPrompt-Waterachievesmoreprecise
mistakenly identifying clusters of algae as water boundaries.
edge extraction, especially in delineating nonwater regions
within the pond, effectively distinguishing waterbodies from Incontrast,SPPrompt-Waterleveragesamultiscaleprompting
mechanism to effectively distinguish between algal biomass
the background and thus improving segmentation accuracy
and true water regions, demonstrating superior robustness to
and spatial consistency. These results confirm that SPPrompt-
suchinterference.Insceneswherethereisstillacertaindegree
Water possesses enhanced boundary awareness and achieves
of algal interference but a distinct boundary between land
highersegmentationaccuracyincomplexwaterbodyscenarios,
further validating its effectiveness in waterbody extraction and lake exists, the overall segmentation performance across
modelsismoresatisfactoryandthedifferencesamongmodels
tasks.
are less noticeable. This may be because models can more
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 12 ---
5608519 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
Fig.9. VisualresultsofdifferentmethodsonCWBSD.(a)Image.(b)Label.(c)U-Net.(d)SwinTransformer.(e)QTNUnet.(f)MECNet.(g)MSLANet.
(h)MSResNET.(i)SkySense++.(j)SPPrompt-Water(ours).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 13 ---
MENGetal.:BREAKINGTHESCALEBARRIER:ASCALE-PROGRESSIVEWATERBODYEXTRACTION 5608519
Fig.10. Visualresultsofdifferentmethodsonfull-sceneimagesfromtheCWBSD.(a)Image.(b)Label.(c)Swintransformer.(d)MSResNET.(e)SkySense++.
(f)SPPrompt-Water(ours).
easily learn discriminative features from objects with strong is seriously challenged. Baseline methods often misclassify
color contrast, resulting in accurate semantic segmentation. regions based on texture features present at the ice–water
In comparison, in continuous waterbody areas affected by interface or on the ice surface itself. In contrast, SPPrompt-
algae and texture variations, models are more susceptible Water, empowered by a progressive scale-aware prompting
to misclassification. This comparison highlights that most mechanism, remains unaffected by the complexity of mixed
models struggle to maintain segmentation performance in ice–water areas, demonstrating its technical advantage in han-
large-scale water scenes without clear boundaries and are dlingchallengingwaterbodysegmentationtasks.Furthermore,
easily affected by surface texture interference. In wave reflec- by incorporating a scale-aware guidance strategy, our method
tion scenarios caused by sunlight creating dynamic reflection enables the model to focus on the holistic shape characteris-
patterns on water surfaces, segmentation accuracy is signifi- tics of waterbodies while enhancing semantic understanding
cantly impaired. Baseline models tend to overemphasize local through prompts. This approach not only improves the recog-
texture features and frequently misidentify specular reflection nition of large, continuous waterbodies but also ensures high
regions as nonwater. Models such as Swin transformer and segmentation accuracy for fine-grained and small-scale water
MSResNet partially suppress such texture noise due to their regions, reflecting the strong adaptability and generalization
ability to model long-range dependencies. SPPrompt-Water ability of the proposed approach.
not only preserves the structural integrity of waterbodies but To evaluate the performance of different methods on full-
also substantially reduces false positives in reflective areas. scene remote sensing images, we selected four representative
In ice–water mixed scenarios where ice coverage causes complex scenarios from the CWBSD dataset: lakes with a
heterogeneity on the water surface, model generalization mix of ice and water, lakes affected by solar reflection, lakes
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 14 ---
5608519 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
TABLEIII bridges. Both U-Net and QTNUnet are significantly affected
QUANTITATIVECOMPARISONRESULTSOFGLH (see the blue circles), resulting in misclassification of vege-
tated areas as water. In the third column of Fig. 11, strong
thin cloud interference is present. Most methods experience
severe segmentation degradation under this condition, with a
substantial increase in erroneous regions. Swin Transformer
performsrelativelybetterbutstillexhibitsseveralmisclassified
areas. In contrast, our method maintains high segmentation
accuracyevenunderthesecomplexinterferenceconditions.In
thefourthcolumnofFig.11,shadowscausedbytallbuildings
partially blocking sunlight are visible (see the red circles).
Except for SkySense++ and our method, all other methods
misidentify shadowed regions as water. While SkySense++
covered by thin clouds, and lakes rich in algae. We then can suppress shadow interference to some extent, our method
compared our proposed method with the three top-performing demonstrates the most stable fine-grained distinction between
baseline methods in the previous quantitative results—Swin water and shadows.
transformer, MSResNET, and SkySense++. In summary, our method consistently shows superior dis-
As shown in Fig. 10, in the lake with a mix of ice criminative ability and robustness in challenging scenarios,
and water scenario, all three baseline methods exhibit a including narrow bridge-gap water bodies, interference from
noticeableperformancedrop,generallybeingdisturbedbythe aquatic vegetation, thin cloud coverage, and shadow confu-
bright textures of snow-covered ice, which leads to confusion sion,furtherhighlightingitspracticalapplicabilityincomplex
in identifying ice-covered regions. In contrast, our method, remote sensing environments.
equipped with a cross-level prompt-guided prior mechanism,
effectively suppresses the interference from snow textures,
D. Model Analysis and Limitations
maintaining higher recognition stability in ice-covered areas.
Inthelakeaffectedbysolarreflectionscenario,theSwintrans- 1) Ablation Studies: To verify the effectiveness of the
former produces evident mosaic-like artifacts, indicating that prompt guidance module and the enforced prompt-based par-
it is strongly disturbed by high-frequency reflection patterns, allel simulation training, we conducted ablation experiments
as well as prediction discontinuities commonly observed in on the CWBSD dataset using SPPrompt-Water, focusing on
sliding-window inference. Intense solar reflection also affects the impact of two core components: the prompt mechanism
MSResNET and SkySense++ to some extent, causing partial and the training strategy on segmentation performance.
omission in the central regions of the lake, while our method In the first group of ablation experiments, the model struc-
maintains spatially consistent predictions across subregion turewaskeptunchanged,butnopromptimageswereprovided,
boundaries. in order to evaluate performance under the no-prompt condi-
3) GLH-Water: The quantitative comparison results on the tion. In the second group, only prompt images were input,
GLH dataset are shown in Table III. Methods such as U-Net but the enforced-prompt parallel simulation training was not
and QTNUnet achieve mIoU values mostly in the 70%–74% applied. The third group employed the full method proposed
range, indicating relatively limited performance. Swin Trans- in our work.
former shows some improvement over other models but The results of the ablation experiments shown in Table IV
remains insufficient for handling complex water body scenar- and Fig. 12 indicate that the introduction of the prompt
ios. Models incorporating multiscale and residual structures, mechanism significantly enhances the model’s fine-grained
suchasMSResNET,furtherincreasethemIoUto78.14%.The segmentation capability. Adding the prompt mechanism
latest vision foundation model in the remote sensing domain, improvedthemIoUfrom81.43%to90.04%andthe F1-score
SkySense++,achieves80.12%mIoUwiththebenefitoflarge- from 84.98% to 92.45%, confirming that the prompt mech-
scale pre-training. In comparison, SPPrompt-Water achieves anism, by guiding spatial attention, effectively strengthens
the best performance across all metrics, with an mIoU of the model’s ability to capture details and accurately identify
86.91%,representinga6.79%improvementoverSkySense++. boundaries of multiscale water bodies. Furthermore, applying
Thissignificantgainfullydemonstratestheeffectivenessofthe theenforcedprompttrainingstrategyincreasedOAby0.38%,
proposed hierarchical prompt-guided framework for complex mIoU by 2.23%, and F1-score by 1.52%. This performance
water body segmentation tasks. improvement primarily stems from the enforced prompt par-
Fig.11presentsvisualcomparisonresultsofdifferentmeth- allel simulation training strategy, which effectively guides the
odsinrepresentativecomplexscenarios,providinganintuitive model to learn more robust feature representations, thereby
assessment of each method’s robustness and generalization enhancing its ability to recognize water regions in complex
abilityinrealremotesensingenvironments.Inthefirstcolumn backgrounds. Through the enforced prompt mechanism in the
ofFig.11,smallwaterbodiescanstillbeobservedinthegaps pretraining phase, the model develops a deep understanding
between bridges. However, none of the methods except ours of multiscale water body targets during training and can more
wereabletoidentifythesenarrowwaterregions.Additionally, precisely capture the spatial distribution characteristics of the
large areas of aquatic vegetation are present beneath the target regions.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 15 ---
MENGetal.:BREAKINGTHESCALEBARRIER:ASCALE-PROGRESSIVEWATERBODYEXTRACTION 5608519
Fig. 11. Visual results of different methods on GLH. (a) Image. (b) Label. (c) U-Net. (d) Swin transformer. (e) QTNUnet. (f) MECNet. (g) MSLANet.
(h)MSResNET.(i)SkySense++.(j)SPPrompt-Water(ours).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 16 ---
5608519 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
TABLEIV (resolution: 7300×6908). The average value is reported to
QUANTITATIVECOMPARISONRESULTSOFABLATIONSTUDIES eliminate variations caused by I/O operations.
The results show that SPPrompt-Water contains 132.1 M
parameters, requires 1250.0G FLOPs, and achieves a full-
scene inference time of 38.51 s. Although these values
are slightly higher than those of traditional convolutional
architectures such as U-Net and MECNet, SPPrompt-Water
performs significantly better than the remote-sensing foun-
dation model SkySense++ (347.8 M parameters, 9621.1G
FLOPs, 113.21 s). The increase in computational cost mainly
TABLEV
arises from the multiscale prompt guidance and cross-layer
MODELSIZEANDINFERENCEEFFICIENCYCOMPARISON
feature interaction modules, which require multilevel con-
textual fusion during inference. However, these components
lead to substantial improvements in segmentation accuracy
and boundary completeness. Compared with models that rely
solely on local convolutions or single-scale Transformers,
SPPrompt-Water strikes a favorable balance between accu-
racy and efficiency, demonstrating strong practical potential
and engineering scalability for full-scene segmentation in
large-format, high-resolution remote sensing imagery.
3) Discussion: Although SPPrompt-Water Net performs
well in complex water body scenarios, there are still several
considerations for practical applications.
Ontheonehand,themodel’sinferencereliesonmultiscale
prompt generation and a hierarchical guidance mechanism,
which can incur substantial time and memory costs when
processing ultra-large images. While our experiments have
demonstratedthemodel’scapabilitytohandlefull-scenehigh-
resolutionimagery,itmaystillberelativelyheavycomparedto
lighter-weight models in production environments with strict
efficiency requirements.
On the other hand, our method is specifically designed
to address the challenge of preserving the overall struc-
tural continuity of large-scale water bodies in high-resolution
remote sensing images. It therefore shows clear advantages
when processing water bodies that span large spatial extents,
have complex shapes, or exhibit strong upstream-downstream
connectivity, such as large rivers and lakes. In contrast, for
scenarios dominated by small-scale water bodies, such as
ponds or narrow channels, where spatial extent is limited
andlong-rangecontextualdependenciesareweak,thebenefits
of multiscale prompt guidance are less pronounced. In these
cases, conventional networks can often achieve stable predic-
tions, and the use of more complex prompt mechanisms does
not provide significant improvements. Similarly, preliminary
experiments on other geospatial classes (e.g., roads) indicate
that the proposed prompt-guided strategy retains a certain
degree of transferability. However, due to the inherent differ-
Fig.12. Visualresultsofablationstudies.(a)Image.(b)Label.(c)Without
ences in spatial topology and structural characteristics among
prompt.(d)Withoutenforcedprompt.(e)SPPrompt-Water(ours).
different object categories, achieving optimal performance in
nonwaterscenariosmayrequireadaptingthepromptdesignto
2) Efficiency Analysis: To comprehensively evaluate the class-specific structural priors.
differences in model size and computational efficiency across
methods,wefurthercomparesevenrepresentativenetworksin
V. CONCLUSION
terms of the number of parameters, floating-point operations To address the challenges of multiscale feature varia-
(FLOPs),andfull-sceneinferencetime(inseconds),asshown tion and texture interference in water body extraction from
in Table V. The full-scene inference time is measured on an high-resolution remote sensing images, we propose a scale-
NVIDIA V100 GPU using 30 images from the GID dataset progressiveprompt-basedframeworkforwaterextraction.This
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 17 ---
MENGetal.:BREAKINGTHESCALEBARRIER:ASCALE-PROGRESSIVEWATERBODYEXTRACTION 5608519
method simulates the human “global-to-local” hierarchical [12] M.MajurskiandP.Bajcsy,“Exacttile-basedsegmentationinferencefor
cognitive process by designing a hierarchical progressive imageslargerthanGPUmemory,”J.Res.Nat.Inst.StandardsTechnol.,
vol.126,Jun.2021,Art.no.126009.
prompt learning strategy that integrates the global semantic
[13] D.Doxaran,J.Froidefond,andP.Castaing,“Remote-sensingreflectance
modeling capability of the prompt guidance module with ofturbidsediment-dominatedwatersreductionofsedimenttypevaria-
the local detail extraction strengths of the Swin transformer.
tionsandchangingilluminationconditionseffectsbyuseofreflectance
ratios,”Appl.Opt.,vol.42,no.15,pp.2623–2634,2003.
This enables cross-scale contextual knowledge transfer and
[14] S. Rajeswari and P. Rathika, “Emerging methodologies in waterbody
noise suppression. On the GID, CWBSD, and GLH-Water delineation:Anin-depthreview,”Int.J.RemoteSens.,vol.45,no.17,
datasets, SPPrompt-Water improves mIoU by approximately pp.5789–5819,Sep.2024.
[15] J. Zhang, S. Lin, L. Ding, and L. Bruzzone, “Multi-scale context
8.1%, 6.65%, and 6.79%, respectively, demonstrating clear
aggregation for semantic segmentation of remote sensing images,”
advantages over the best existing models. Ablation studies RemoteSens.,vol.12,no.4,p.701,Feb.2020.
further validate the effectiveness of the morphology-driven [16] P. Frazier and K. Page, “Water body detection and delineation with
LandsatTMdata,”PhotogrammetricEng.remoteSens.,vol.66,no.12,
enforcedpromptsupervisionstrategy,whichdynamicallycon-
pp.1461–1467,2000.
strains target region activation and suppresses background [17] Y. Zhuang and C. Chen, “A method for water body extraction based
noise, significantly enhancing the model’s ability to finely on the tasselled cap transformation from remote sensing images,” in
Proc. 5th Int. Workshop Earth Observ. Remote Sens. Appl. (EORSA),
delineateheterogeneouswaterboundariesandmaintainspatial
Jun.2018,pp.1–5.
continuity in large-scale water bodies. This work offers new [18] S. K. McFeeters, “The use of the normalized difference water index
insights for dynamic monitoring of complex water bodies in (NDWI)inthedelineationofopenwaterfeatures,”Int.J.RemoteSens.,
vol.17,no.7,pp.1425–1432,May1996.
high-resolution remote sensing imagery. [19] H. Xu, “Modification of normalised difference water index
(NDWI) to enhance open water features in remotely sensed
imagery,” Int. J. Remote Sens., vol.27, no.14, pp.3025–3033,
ACKNOWLEDGMENT Jul.2006.
[20] A. Paul, D. Tripathi, and D. Dutta, “Application and comparison of
The authors would like to thank the Supercomputing Cen-
advanced supervised classifiers in extraction of water bodies from
ter of Wuhan University for providing computing power to remotesensingimages,”Sustain.WaterResour.Manage.,vol.4,no.4,
conduct experiments. pp.905–919,Dec.2018.
[21] J.Fu,J.Wang,andJ.Li,“Studyontheautomaticextractionofwater
body from TM image using decision tree algorithm,” Proc. SPIE,
vol.6625,pp.17–25,Sep.2007.
REFERENCES
[22] B. Ko, H. Kim, and J. Nam, “Classification of potential water
bodies using Landsat 8 OLI and a combination of two boosted
[1] J.-F.Pekel,A.Cottam,N.Gorelick,andA.S.Belward,“High-resolution random forest classifiers,” Sensors, vol.15, no.6, pp.13763–13777,
mapping of global surface water and its long-term changes,” Nature, Jun.2015.
vol.540,no.7633,pp.418–422,Dec.2016. [23] C. Huang, Y. Chen, S. Zhang, and J. Wu, “Detecting, extract-
[2] L. Chakraborty, H. Taherimashhadi, J. Thistlethwaite, and D. Henstra, ing, and monitoring surface water from space using optical
“A probabilistic framework for spatio-temporal social vulnerability sensors: A review,” Rev. Geophys., vol.56, no.2, pp.333–360,
assessment to flood hazards in Canada using Bayesian machine Jun.2018.
learning,” J. Geovisualization Spatial Anal., vol.10, no.1, p.3, Jun. [24] Y. Chen, R. Fan, X. Yang, J. Wang, and A. Latif, “Extraction
2026. of urban water bodies from high-resolution remote-sensing
[3] N. Sharnagat et al., “State-of-the-art status of Google Earth engine imagery using deep learning,” Water, vol.10, no.5, p.585,
(GEE)applicationinlandandwaterresourcemanagement:Asciento- May2018.
metricanalysis,”J.GeovisualizationSpatialAnal.,vol.9,no.1,p.16, [25] X. Dai, M. Xia, L. Weng, K. Hu, H. Lin, and M. Qian, “Multiscale
Jun.2025. locationattentionnetworkforbuildingandwatersegmentationofremote
[4] M.Li,P.Wu,B.Wang,H.Park,H.Yang,andY.Wu,“Adeeplearning sensingimage,”IEEETrans.Geosci.RemoteSens.,vol.61,2023,Art.
method of water body extraction from high resolution remote sensing no.5609519.
images with multisensors,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. [26] V. Badrinarayanan, A. Kendall, and R. Cipolla, “SegNet: A deep
RemoteSens.,vol.14,pp.3120–3132,2021. convolutional encoder–decoder architecture for image segmentation,”
[5] Y. Liu, S. Shi, J. Wang, and Y. Zhong, “Seeing beyond the patch: IEEETrans.PatternAnal.Mach.Intell.,vol.39,no.12,pp.2481–2495,
Scale-adaptivesemanticsegmentationofhigh-resolutionremotesensing Dec.2017.
imagerybasedonreinforcementlearning,”inProc.IEEE/CVFInt.Conf. [27] M.Sarıgu¨l,B.M.Ozyildirim,andM.Avci,“Differentialconvolutional
Comput.Vis.(ICCV),Oct.2023,pp.16822–16832. neuralnetwork,”NeuralNetw.,vol.116,pp.279–287,Aug.2019.
[6] D. Sun, G. Gao, L. Huang, Y. Liu, and D. Liu, “Extraction of water [28] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
bodies from high-resolution remote sensing imagery based on a deep imagerecognition,”inProc.IEEEConf.Comput.Vis.PatternRecognit.
semantic segmentation network,” Sci. Rep., vol.14, no.1, p.14604, (CVPR),Jun.2016,pp.770–778.
Jun.2024. [29] W. Feng, H. Sui, W. Huang, C. Xu, and K. An, “Water body
[7] J. Chen et al., “Remote sensing big data for water environment moni- extraction from very high-resolution remote sensing imagery using
toring:Currentstatus,challenges,andfutureprospects,”Earth’sFuture, deep U-Net and a superpixel-based conditional random field model,”
vol.10,no.2,p.2021,Feb.2022. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol.16, no.4, pp.618–622,
[8] J.Kang,H.Guan,D.Peng,andZ.Chen,“Multi-scalecontextextractor Apr.2019.
networkforwater-bodyextractionfromhigh-resolutionopticalremotely [30] L.-C.Chen,G.Papandreou,F.Schroff,andH.Adam,“Rethinkingatrous
sensedimages,”Int.J.Appl.EarthObserv.Geoinf.,vol.103,Dec.2021, convolutionforsemanticimagesegmentation,”2017,arXiv:1706.05587.
Art.no.102499. [31] D.Xiang,X.Zhang,W.Wu,andH.Liu,“DensePPMUNet—A:Arobust
[9] Z. Wang, X. Gao, Y. Zhang, and G. Zhao, “MSLWENet: A novel deeplearningnetworkforsegmentingwaterbodiesfromaerialimages,”
deeplearningnetworkforlakewaterbodyextractionofGoogleremote IEEETrans.Geosci.RemoteSens.,vol.61,2023,Art.no.4202611.
sensingimages,”RemoteSens.,vol.12,no.24,p.4140,Dec.2020. [32] Z. Li, Q. Zhu, J. Yang, J. Lv, and Q. Guan, “A cross-domain object-
[10] M. Wang, C. Li, X. Yang, D. Chu, Z. Zhou, and R. Y. K. Lau, semantic matching framework for imbalanced high spatial resolution
“QTU-Net:Quaterniontransformer-basedU-netforwaterbodyextrac- imagery water-body extraction,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
tionofRGBsatelliteimage,”IEEETrans.Geosci.RemoteSens.,vol.62, vol.62,2024,Art.no.5629015.
2024,Art.no.5634816. [33] B. Dang and Y. Li, “MSResNet: Multiscale residual network
[11] Z. Zhang, M. Lu, S. Ji, H. Yu, and C. Nie, “Rich CNN features for via self-supervised learning for water-body detection in remote
water-body segmentation from very high resolution aerial and satellite sensing imagery,” Remote Sens., vol.13, no.16, p.3122,
imagery,”RemoteSens.,vol.13,no.10,p.1912,May2021. Aug.2021.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 18 ---
5608519 IEEETRANSACTIONSONGEOSCIENCEANDREMOTESENSING,VOL.64,2026
[34] J. Kim, J. K. Lee, and K. M. Lee, “Accurate image super-resolution Fanlin Meng received the B.S. degree in remote
usingverydeepconvolutionalnetworks,”inProc.IEEEConf.Comput. sensingscienceandtechnologyfromShandongUni-
Vis.PatternRecognit.(CVPR),Jun.2016,pp.1646–1654. versityofScienceandTechnology,Qingdao,China,
[35] H.-F. Zhong, H.-M. Sun, D.-N. Han, Z.-H. Li, and R.-S. Jia, “Lake in 2023. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
water body extraction of optical remote sensing images based on in remote sensing of resources and environment
semanticsegmentation,”Appl.Intell.,vol.52,no.15,pp.17974–17989, with the School of Earth Sciences and Resources,
Dec.2022. ChinaUniversityofGeosciences(Beijing),Beijing,
[36] A.Vaswanietal.,“Attentionisallyouneed,”inProc.Adv.NeuralInf. China.
Process.Syst.,vol.30,2017,pp.5998–6008. His research interests include intelligent remote
[37] A.Dosovitskiyetal.,“Animageisworth16×16words:Transformers sensinginterpretationandimageprocessing.
forimagerecognitionatscale,”2020,arXiv:2010.11929.
[38] L. Ding et al., “Looking outside the window: Wide-context trans-
former for the semantic segmentation of high-resolution remote
sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol.60,
2022,Art.no.4410313.
[39] H.-F. Zhong, Q. Sun, H.-M. Sun, and R.-S. Jia, “NT-Net: A semantic
segmentation network for extracting lake water bodies from optical
Guo Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
remote sensing images based on transformer,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
and Ph.D. degrees in photogrammetry and remote
RemoteSens.,vol.60,2022,Art.no.5627513.
sensing from the School of Remote Sensing and
[40] Q. Zhang, X. Hu, and Y. Xiao, “A novel hybrid model based
InformationEngineering,WuhanUniversity,Wuhan,
on CNN and multi-scale transformer for extracting water bod-
China,in2000and2005,respectively.
ies from high resolution remote sensing images,” ISPRS Ann.
His doctoral dissertation was on rectifying high-
Photogramm., Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci., vol.1, pp.889–894,
resolution remote sensing images under lack of
Dec.2023.
ground control points. He has been with the State
[41] C.-I. Cira, M.-A´. Manso-Callejo, R. Alcarria, T. Iturrioz, and
Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in
J.-J.Arranz-Justel,“Insightsintotheeffectsoftilesizeandtileoverlap
Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing, Wuhan
levels on semantic segmentation models trained for road surface area
University,since2005,wherehebecameaProfessor
extractionfromaerialorthophotography,”RemoteSens.,vol.16,no.16,
in2011.Hisresearchinterestsincludespacephotogrammetry(includingthe
p.2954,Aug.2024.
processing and applications for optical load, synthetic aperture radar (SAR)
[42] J.Li,Y.Cai,Q.Li,M.Kou,andT.Zhang,“Areviewofremotesensing load,videoload,andlaserload).
image segmentation by deep learning methods,” Int. J. Digit. Earth,
vol.17,no.1,Dec.2024,Art.no.2328827.
[43] T.B.Brownetal.,“Languagemodelsarefew-shotlearners,”inProc.
NIPS,2020,pp.1877–1901.
[44] M.Jiaetal.,“Visualprompttuning,”inProc.Eur.Conf.Comput.Vis.,
Oct.2022,pp.709–727.
[45] K.Zhou,J.Yang,C.C.Loy,andZ.Liu,“Conditionalpromptlearning
for vision-language models,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Hao Cui received the B.S. degree in surveying
PatternRecognit.(CVPR),Jun.2022,pp.16795–16804. andmappingengineeringfromShanxiDatongUni-
[46] A.Kirillovetal.,“Segmentanything,”2023,arXiv:2304.02643. versity, Datong, China, in 2015, the M.S. degree
[47] S.A.ImmanuelandH.R.Sinulingga,“Learnablepromptforfew-shot in geographic information systems from Lanzhou
semanticsegmentationinremotesensingdomain,”inProc.IEEE/CVF JiaotongUniversity,Lanzhou,China,in2018,and
Conf.Comput.Vis.PatternRecognit.Workshops(CVPRW),Jun.2024, the Ph.D. degree in photogrammetry and remote
pp.2755–2761. sensing from the State Key Laboratory of Infor-
[48] X.Wang,X.Zhang,Y.Cao,W.Wang,C.Shen,andT.Huang,“SegGPT: mation Engineering in Surveying, Mapping, and
Segmentingeverythingincontext,”2023,arXiv:2304.03284. RemoteSensing,WuhanUniversity,Wuhan,China,
[49] K. Chen et al., “RSPrompter: Learning to prompt for remote sensing in2021.
instancesegmentationbasedonvisualfoundationmodel,”IEEETrans. HeiscurrentlyengagedaPost-DoctoralResearch
Geosci.RemoteSens.,vol.62,2024,Art.no.4701117. with the State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying,
[50] R. I. Sultan, C. Li, H. Zhu, P. Khanduri, M. Brocanelli, and D. Zhu, Mapping, and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University. His research inter-
“GeoSAM: Fine-tuning SAM with multi-modal prompts for mobility ests include image quality improvement, radiation correction, and image
infrastructuresegmentation,”2023,arXiv:2311.11319. informationextractionfromremotesensing.
[51] L. P. Osco et al., “The segment anything model (SAM) for remote
sensingapplications:Fromzerotooneshot,”Int.J.Appl.EarthObserv.
Geoinf.,vol.124,Nov.2023,Art.no.103540.
[52] T. Ren et al., “Grounded SAM: Assembling open-world models for
diversevisualtasks,”2024,arXiv:2401.14159.
[53] S. Liu et al., “Grounding DINO: Marrying DINO with grounded pre-
trainingforopen-setobjectdetection,”inProc.Eur.Conf.Comput.Vis., Gui Gao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
2023,pp.38–55. B.S. degree in information engineering, the M.S.
[54] Z.Liuetal.,“Swintransformer:Hierarchicalvisiontransformerusing and Ph.D. degrees in remote sensing information
shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), processing from National University of Defense
Oct.2021,pp.9992–10002. Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2002,
[55] F. Milletari, N. Navab, and S.-A. Ahmadi, “V-Net: Fully 2003,and2007,respectively.
convolutional neural networks for volumetric medical image From 2007, he joined the Faculty of Informa-
segmentation,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. 3D Vis. (3DV), Oct. 2016, tionEngineering,SchoolofElectronicScienceand
pp.565–571. Engineering, NUDT, as an Associate Professor.
[56] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dolla´r, “Focal loss for From 2017, he was with Faculty of Geosciences
denseobjectdetection,”inProc.IEEEInt.Conf.Comput.Vis.(ICCV), andEnvironmentalEngineering,SouthwestJiaotong
Oct.2017,pp.2999–3007. University, Chengdu, China, where he is currently a Professor. He is
[57] Y.Li,B.Dang,W.Li,andY.Zhang,“GLH-water:Alarge-scaledataset also the Leader of Sichuan Natural Science Foundation Innovation Group
for global surface water detection in large-size very-high-resolution and the Innovation Team of Ministry of Education of China. He has
satellite imagery,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, vol.38, authored over 100 journal and conference papers and written eight books
no.20,pp.22213–22221. and an English chapter. His research interests include synthetic aperture
[58] K.Wuetal.,“Asemantic-enhancedmulti-modalremotesensingfoun- radar (SAR) signal processing, interferometric SAR (InSAR), statistical
dationmodelforEarthobservation,”NatureMach.Intell.,vol.7,no.8, modeling of SAR image, target detection, and SAR ground moving target
pp.1–15,Aug.2025. indication(GMTI).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--- Page 19 ---
MENGetal.:BREAKINGTHESCALEBARRIER:ASCALE-PROGRESSIVEWATERBODYEXTRACTION 5608519
Wenxuan Liu received the Ph.D. degree in car- Wei Wang received the B.S. degree in geographic
tography and geographical information engineering information science from Henan Polytechnic Uni-
fromtheStateKeyLaboratoryofInformationEngi- versity, Jiaozuo, China, in 2018. He is currently
neeringinSurveying,MappingandRemoteSensing pursuing the M.S. degree in geomatics science
(LIESMARS), Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, and technology with the School of Geomatics and
in2022. GeographicScience,LiaoningTechnicalUniversity,
HeiscurrentlyaResearchScientistwithWuhan Fuxin,China.
DaspatialTechnologyCompanyLtd.,Wuhan,China, His research interests include building semantic
wherehisresearchfocuseson3-Dreal-scenemodel- segmentationandintelligentinterpretationofremote
ingandsemanticunderstanding.Hisexpertiseliesin sensingimagery.
AI-drivenprocessingofmultisourcegeospatialdata,
withrecentworkadvancingAIapplicationsinUAVimageryinterpretation.
Haifeng Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
master’s degree in transportation engineering from
SouthChinaUniversityofTechnology,Guangzhou,
China,in2005,andthePh.D.degreeinphotogram-
metry and remote sensing from Wuhan University, Zekun Hu received the B.S. degree in resource
Wuhan,China,in2009. exploration engineering from Xinjiang University,
HewasaResearchAssociatewiththeDepartment Urumqi, China, in 2020, and the M.S. degree in
ofLandSurveyingandGeo-Informatics,TheHong geologicalinformationengineeringfromChinaUni-
KongPolytechnicUniversity,HongKong,in2011, versity of Geosciences (Wuhan), Wuhan, China, in
andaVisitingScholarwiththeUniversityofIllinois 2024. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
atUrbana–Champaign,Urbana,IL,USA,from2013 in photogrammetry and remote sensing with the
to 2014. He is currently a Professor with the School of Geosciences and StateKeyLaboratoryofInformationEngineeringin
Info-Physics, Central South University, Changsha, China. He has authored Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing, Wuhan
over30journalarticles.Hisresearchinterestsincludegeo/remotesensingbig University,Wuhan.
data,machine/deeplearning,andartificial/brain-inspiredintelligence. His research interests include intelligent remote
Dr.Liisareviewerformanyjournals. sensinginterpretationandimageprocessing.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Maritime University. Downloaded on July 04,2026 at 04:24:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.